# Research on Grid Scheduling Mechanism Design for Virtual Power Plant Cluster

**A Dissertation Submitted to Shanghai Jiao Tong University for Bachelor Degree**

---

**Author:** Zeng Deyang  
**Supervisor:** Li Jiamei

**School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering**  
**Shanghai Jiao Tong University**  
**Shanghai, P.R.China**  
**May, 2024**

---

## Abstract

As an aggregation of various distributed resources, Virtual Power Plants (VPPs) are often compared to conventional Power Plants. However, such comparisons usually remain superficial. Can we further quantify the differences between the two? In previous studies on feature identification and resource aggregation of VPPs, the external characteristic differences between VPPs and conventional Power Plants were often described qualitatively. This description may be suitable for subjects with significantly different resource types but may not be accurate enough for subjects with similar resource types. As the differences among VPPs become increasingly significant, the differentiation of external characteristics will become indispensable in the refinement of grid scheduling decisions.

Based on the need for differentiation among subjects and focusing on the regulating quality of the subjects, this paper deconstructs regulating quality from five dimensions: flexibility, reliability, stability, economy, and environmental protection. These five dimensions also represent five types of regulatory characteristics. Then, several quantifiable indicators are established under each dimension, and each indicator is weighted using a combination of fuzzy analytic hierarchy process and entropy weight method. Finally, a multi-dimensional and multi-indicator comprehensive evaluation system for the regulating quality of VPPs and conventional Power Plants is constructed. The differences in regulatory characteristics between VPPs and conventional Power Plants are visually represented through radar charts.

Additionally, based on the evaluation of the regulating quality of various resources, an optimization model for distributed resource aggregation in VPPs is established with the goal of maximizing regulating quality. This optimization model lays a theoretical foundation for subsequent differentiation analysis among subjects.

Regulating quality and regulatory characteristics can be used not only to distinguish between VPPs and conventional Power Plants but also to differentiate among various VPPs. As a subject attribute, it is natural to wonder how this new parameter of regulating quality will affect market clearing. In previous studies on VPP participation in grid scheduling, incentive mechanism design primarily focused on external incentives. When VPP-like entities with high regulating quality participate in the market, incorporating the regulating quality parameter of market entities into the clearing model can increase the clearing transaction volume and revenue level of high-quality resource entities such as VPPs. This aligns with their interest demands and internally motivates them to actively participate in market declarations, promoting the consumption of high-quality resources.

Based on the concept of internal incentives and promoting consumption, this paper takes the power system peaking market as an example to improve the traditional peaking market clearing model. By incorporating the regulating quality parameters of market entities, the traditional single-objective optimization problem with economic optimization as the goal is transformed into a multi-objective optimization problem with both economic and quality objectives. Quantitative indicators for the economy and quality of the clearing results under different quality constraints are then proposed. As the economy of the clearing results inevitably decreases as the quality increases, selecting the appropriate quality constraint becomes a trade-off issue. A decision point selection basis is proposed based on the degree of change between the two.

Furthermore, after market entities participate in quality declarations, compared to the original market, if their revenue increases, they will be more willing to participate in the project. However, if their revenue decreases, it may discourage their enthusiasm for declarations. Therefore, starting from the VCG mechanism, this paper quantifies the changes in unit competitiveness after participating in quality declarations and proposes the concept of substitution degree. Based on the substitution degree, a compensation mechanism that appropriately balances revenue and motivates entities to participate in quality declarations is designed.

In a cluster of Virtual Power Plants (VPPs), an effective differentiation mechanism is crucial for improving overall efficiency and leveraging individual strengths. So, can this organizational form, which includes multiple VPPs, effectively differentiate between internal members? Previous studies on multi-VPPs or VPP cluster have focused on internal or multi-agent games. However, from the grid perspective, there has been relatively little research on how to schedule these entities. While meeting basic scheduling requirements, the preferences of grid scheduling are reflected in the selection of various scheduling schemes when faced with scheduling entities with different characteristics. This is inseparable from an effective cluster management system.

Based on the idea of cluster management and the traditional cloud-group-end scheduling architecture, this paper introduces the concepts of comprehensive VPPs and Specialized VPPs, building upon the aggregating optimization model mentioned earlier. Comprehensive VPPs aim to maximize regulating quality through resource aggregation, while specialized VPPs target the maximization of specific regulatory characteristics or aggregate similar resource types, such as flexible VPPs or load-based VPPs. Leveraging distributed resource cluster management theory, a cluster organizational structure is established, with varying scheduling strategies across different time scales: day-ahead, intra-day, and real-time. Subsequently, a cloud management platform for the VPP cluster is proposed, incorporating cluster characteristics, ultimately constructing a grid scheduling framework tailored to the VPP cluster.

## Summary

In summary, the entire text uses "subject differentiation" as a clue to gradually build a grid scheduling framework for VPP cluster. Subject differentiation refers to the process of quantifying differences, introducing differences, and distinguishing between subjects. Essentially, it determines the scheduling priority of each subject in different demand scenarios. The second, third, and fourth chapters of this paper correspond to the three work contents mentioned in the previous section.

**Chapter 2** introduces the concepts of regulating quality and regulatory characteristics, which are the basis for subject differentiation and the process of quantifying differences. From regulatory characteristics to regulating quality, the chapter portrays the multi-dimensional differences among various power plants, moving from the concrete to the abstract. After establishing the regulating quality evaluation system, an aggregating optimization model aimed at maximizing regulating quality is further proposed, foreshadowing Chapter 4.

**Chapter 3** introduces regulating quality into the clearing model and analyzes how this difference can impact the market. In the market, product differentiation often signifies a competitive advantage, and changes in the competitive landscape can simultaneously bring about variations in revenue levels. The trade-off between economy and quality is not limited to the peaking market involving VPPs. Quality can represent any regulatory characteristic, and this trade-off will be prevalent in cluster-oriented scheduling decisions.

**Chapter 4** presents the concepts of comprehensive VPPs and specialized VPPs, representing the process of distinguishing between subjects. It then establishes an internal cluster organizational structure and an external cluster scheduling framework. Based on the traditional cloud-group-end grid scheduling architecture, it ultimately achieves the radiation of subject differentiation from the micro to the macro level.

## Limitations and Future Work

The author considers that this paper has done some groundbreaking work. In the field of virtual power plant cluster, similar papers have not yet appeared. To some extent, part of the content of this paper comes from the author's imagination, exploration, and attempt of the future grid scheduling mechanism. Of course, there are still many imperfections in this paper. The dismantling of research objects, the selection of indicators, and the scientific nature of quantitative methods need to be improved. Both the aggregating optimization model and the peaking clearing model are multi-objective optimizations, which simply adopts the main objective method in multi-objective optimization. In addition, the calculation examples used for analysis in these two chapters are relatively simple. The core of the compensation mechanism design lies in the idea of compensation. The specific calculation formulas only design two simple functions that conform to the idea of compensation, without considering the balance of payments. The details of the virtual power plant cluster organization structure and scheduling framework need to be improved, and there are still many unconsidered places. At the same time, there is a lack of example analysis to verify the validity of subject differentiation. Subsequent researchers need to continue to conduct more in-depth research and discussion in this direction. The author's level is limited, and I hope the work and ideas proposed in this dissertation will help future research.
